---
layout: post
title: Deploy Your Rails Application in 2 Minutes with Heroku
summary: The simplest possible application deployment for Rails applications.
---

<a href="http://heroku.com/">Heroku</a>, Instant Ruby Platform. We've been using Heroku's free service for hosting staging servers for a few weeks now. It takes just a moment to setup and it couldn't be any easier to use.

Today Heroku announced a <a href="http://heroku.com/pricing">pricing model</a> and we should be using them for more than staging servers in the near future.

<h3>Start the clock</h3>

First timer? You'll need to do some minor setup. The last command will ask you for your Heroku login/password and upload your SSH pubkey.

{% highlight sh %}
sudo gem install heroku
heroku create
{% endhighlight %}

Heroku installs gem dependencies for your app when you do a git push, so it needs to have a .gems file in an easy to parse format.

Run these commands to install a rake task for automatically generating a .gems file from your Rails gem dependencies. You'll need to rerun the rake task whenever you change your dependencies.

{% highlight sh %}
curl http://gist.github.com/101101.txt > lib/tasks/heroku.rake
rake heroku:gems
git add lib/tasks/heroku.rake .gems 
git commit lib/tasks/heroku.rake .gems -m "Adding gem manifest for Heroku."
{% endhighlight %}

Here we go, push your app, migrate the database and open it in a web browser! 

{% highlight sh %}
git push heroku master
heroku rake db:migrate
heroku open
{% endhighlight %}

Done! Your application is up and running on Heroku's servers, 100% ready to use.

<h3>Troubleshooting</h3>

If the application had any trouble starting try the commands below to get a better view.

{% highlight sh %}
heroku logs     # view the application logs
heroku open     # some error messages show on the web
{% endhighlight %}
